+++
title = 'Latest ideas, reflections, plans.'
date = 2025-04-21T14:38:33+02:00
draft = true
type = 'blog'
+++

Updates from me down the line! I wrote this summer:

"So my next career move, whatever it will be, will have to have some net positive downstream impact."

Luckily - that worked out. I now find myself plugging away at problems for the EPA with Eastern Research Group as a gov consultant. This is still data analytics-y work, like web scraping, simple analyses, understanding client needs, etc. I would love more exposure to challenging technical material to grow as a data science and social scientist in general. But I am happy that it has that downstream impact, and this works, for now (especially in this crazy market).

I'm also enjoying the New York life I'm setting up for myself here, although at the same time preemptively mourning what 'could be' as I plot my move to Chicago for grad school (Northwestern Technology and Social Behavior PhD!). I'll likely have to UHaul and bring all the instruments and some furniture with me to the new spot - I'm thinking Uptown.

Anyway, is there a theme here? Is this just a weirdly public journal?

No, at least, not ideally. This is supposed to be an approach to organizing my (mostly professional) thinking in a clear, written, form; the public-facing aspect should be a motivator to keep it concise (obviously, mixed results so far with that).

Pre-PhD, I have a few goals. On the practical note, I need to put together an NSF-GRFP application, which would require some better clarity on what it is I propose to study. I see promise in three tracks (not all of which would land so well with today's NSF for, um, certain reasons). Track 1: CSS with an HCI slant. CSCW, CHI. Track 2: Large online social experiments: CSS with the CS as purely method and the contribution on the social sci side. Track 3: Science of science research.

Post a good chat with Ziv, the choice here is less track and more what kind of questions I want to be answering--maybe not just kind, but exactly, what? It's tricky because they all interest me. Track 1 seems more emphasis on "building" which both slightly intimidates me and leaves me skeptical, because of the 'toy' problem of HCI, where artifacts are rarely, in my opinion, especially meaningful contributions. A certain browser plugin, a small device, if not forged in the fire of user demand, is unlikely to be actually taken up by people. This is rarely the point when they are made, they often attempt to prove a hypothesis. But scale and impact are key. Better to think of such a product as an 'experimental rig', like we did in neuroscience. The rig is the method, it can be a contribution in terms of conducting science. But don't suggest people will broadly adopt it. 'YourFeed' from Ziv or 'PsyNet' from Nuri are good examples of adaptable 'rig' contributions for demonstrating things. 

Ultimately, I am after some fundamental truths about social behavior, online and its relation to  real world behavior. The online behavior is sometimes difficult to generalize with, because it can be so affected by the architecture of the site. Much work to be done on whether Twitterology translates to Blueskyology--which ideas and to what extent. How about Reddit? How can you possibly isolate user-base affects? What fundamental architecture decisions can be made about community design online that shape user behaviors (importantly, social) in predictable ways? How can these be quantitative and continuously modeled, and what laws can be derived and proved but somehow stay relevant? Is there a social analogue (not a tight one but of the same form) of Fitts' law?

How do LLMs change the online social game? How does one do research on LLM interactions that stays relevant as LLMs evolve?

Key skills I want to build going into the doctorate: network science techniques and terminologies, and a grasp on this material to the point where I can build hypotheses that are testable with those methods and apply them intelligently to online questions. It would be amazing to develop technical expertise with Agnes, and bring that technical expertise to Billy's work and add my networksy spice to his papers. This could be a strategic move for a personal academic brand. Very nice and good - so what gaps should I focus on filling? I need to continue with MIT's algorithms class online, and move on to that next level (40122 or something). I need to go back to gilbert strang's linear algebra with applications class, gloss the bits I remember, and dig into the graph problems towards the end. I need to level up my proof abilities, perhaps 'How to Solve it' or Spivak's calculus (somewhat scary... but the only way to get over my math imposter syndrome is to face it head on, or it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy). I need a broad and up to date understanding of natural language processing and computational linguistics techniques. It sure would be nice to have brushed up on comp neuro classes, which are fertile ground for applications ofcomputational methods for understanding networks that could be borrowed and applied to social situations. I should practice playing around with LLMs, as from scratch as I can manage. Run them locally. Theoretically I should play around with d3js. All of this is easier to learn with chatgpt, if I can use it as a good enough tutor, and have it challenge me. Then there's social theory - micromotives, wealth of networkds, I need touchstones and depth in both the technical and the social if I can really connect them. Lifelong project there. I need a broad strokes understanding of social thought and how it has been historically translated to internet research - proven, disproven, remixed, expanded. Broadening one's scope methodologically even without technical examples or goals on hand is key for being able to ask new questions. If you don't understand the ever-expanding suite of methods, of ways to ask questions, or ways to render data into forms about which questions may be asked, those questions will not occur to you and you will not answer them. Reading papers in the field will only get you so far in that you see ways in which people have already applied methods to your field's questions of interest. You need to be constantly exposing yourself to cutting edge methods and their applications in other fields in order to be locally novel. This can be thought of as mapping question space for creative purposes.

Ideas that have stuck with me and should be built (you can just... do things!) - a better transit optimizer on top of google maps for multi-form transit (there's a word for that but I can't think of it right now) - in my use case, citibikes and the MTA. Currently living in Ridgewood, but spent the day in prospect park. It was not fun to try and get from one end of brooklyn to the other - as my cousin said - 'They do not want to see you cross brooklyn!' or something. She said it better than that. Today I took the M from Seneca to Myrtle where it meets the J, got a citibike across bedstuy, then took the cute little shuttle train (S line) from Franklin Ave to the prospect park stop (it was a beautiful day, spent it hanging out with my dear friend Stav). You pay twice for the subway but the citibike is paid for with the $200 yearly membership (great deal). So it's not optimized for money, exactly, but it felt faster than going into Manhattan and out. 

Gmaps will currently give you optimized citibike directions or train directions but not multimodal (THAT's THE WORD! MASDFJHERKGJSKFDGLDQ), as far as I know. That probably already exists, but it would be fun and not so hard to build one myself. Then I could have options for minimizing uber expenses, like taking the MTA to a closer spot and then ubering, if time is under pressure but cost as well. You could set parameters in the bike and train app, sort of like google flights. How much do I want to spend total? How many different changes do I want to make at maximum? How many total minutes do I want to spend biking? It integrates the weather to let you know if you should bring gloves on the bike ride, or if it will rain (then probably don't bike), if it will be hot, the likelihood you get sweaty on the ride (to be minimized if you're going on, say, a date). 

Maybe you don't care as much when you get there, within a window, but you'd like to minimize delays of waiting around for a train - when is the optimal time to leave given some padding to make sure you make connections, and assuming a buffer for holdups on the road with the bike? How to optimize speed and cost tradeoff with electric bike costing a bit more, but also saving you time, and sweat, getting up hills? Not to be underestimated. If there's one insane hill but otherwise flat, and the stations are well placed, could you even ~trade bikes in just for that hill and switch back after~ assuming no undocking fee as in the yearly membership? What about the failure mode where you go to get a bike and there are no bikes in the dock! Or you go to return one but the dock is full? It's the worst feeling and tanks your optimization completely. The model should know the patterns for each dock or area given time of day and weather when recommending routes (docks by parks and the water on nice days will experience heightened demand for both bikes and docks). How can LLMs help us integrate concepts like, a happier route, a funkier route, a sillier route? The most effervescent route? How can you mix these with, say sliders? An interesting implementation would have word embeddings for every city street by embedding all the reviews of the constituent restaurants and attractions. You could recommend a route that optimizes certain features in the embedding space (although ratings may relate mostly to experiences inside the buildings on that street, and may or many not translate to the experience of walking by. But if you walk by place you may also walk in. And the experience of walking by is at least loosely related to the reviews of the inside. And the people leaving the reviews may be more present by the entrances). 

Noting that such an approach leads to the potential amplification of geographic biases, which have long been baked into american society, intentionally, such as redlining. One could also ask the system for the most 'insert negative term' street, and the result of course would be the blended and synthesized reflection of all the reviewers' biases. What would the hypothetical effects be here, in terms of long lasting and self-reinforcing neighborhood identity? How could this approach be vulnerable to reputation attacks? We probably already see this with google maps, but the use of the AI black box obfuscates and lends unspecifiably authority to the biases. How do embedded reviews relate to behavioral data in the city in terms of volume and traffic data, especially over time? Is there any way one could attempt to draw and conclude a causal arrow from those reviews to foot traffic, and then, economic prosperty? It would be interesting to trace that link through, and seeing how, for example, bad reviews in a certain density of locations seems to predict or somehow cause changes in behavior, and what those dynamics are - tipping point, linear, exponential?

Additional thought about an AI future where your assistant is watching everything you do and optimizing things by clueing you into unknown unknowns. Cameras are already ubiquitous on smartphones. AI assistants will soon be ubiquitous, also on these smartphones. What happens when AI can analyze these videos very very well, and clue the user into what they are doing inefficiently? I.e., "Did you know that if you clean that cast iron pan with soap, you are stripping the non-stick properties of its seasoning?" "Did you know that you have been pronouncing 'inchoate' wrong your entire life?" "Did you know you spend an unusual amount of time in the bathroom and should probably see a doctor?" etc etc. Perhaps this future has already been imagined with google's ability to know you better than you know yourself, ads for baby products before realizing pregnancy etc. But this is different because that was limited to online behavior and this is potentially all recordable behavior, not to mention adding in physiological data for the AI to interpret and factor in. The result could be amazing, and shockingly invasive and highly, highly valuable data on an individual. The data need not even reach back to the cloud, could stay local but still be subject to advertisement (horrifying. But a possibility we must reckon with, illustrate, and possibly regulate). What is humanly lost when we are perfectly optimized? Are we leaving time for more human activities, or in sucking the human error out of daily life, vaccuuming up humanity along with it? I call this future, somewhat ironically, 'God's Eye View'.

Musically, getting excited for the first jazz gig I have coming up, in forever (probably since strange fraternity dance in Munich at the Bayerischer Hof hotel, which was cool but low stakes). I need to absolutely shed some standards and learn intros. Much to do there... songwriting wise, I am lucky to have access to Remy's studio and instruments, and should make use of that. I need to fix or replace my i2i and just put demos together for my favorite licks and tunes. There are so many tutorials online for making amazing sounds. I'm lucky to have nice gear and there are free plugins everywear. Acoustic, electric, bass, nord, what more does one need. Time to get cracking. Bon Iver and Elliott did it without much gear at all. It's about good songs and just executing. Studio access plus Wonny being around to show me how to mix and master like a pro means I should just do it now before I move. Better execution and productivity requires a stronger routine anchored in an early wakeup, which comes from an early bedtime (he writes at 2am early on a Monday morning - schade). 

Last quick thoughts on books I recently read - Neal Stephenson's Snow Crash, Yanagihara's A Little Life, and Zevin's Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow. They interfaced in interesting ways. Snow Crash and Tomorrow asked questions about virtual worlds and relationships, relationships between people in real life when they go digital, relationships between our own real life and digital selves, organizing large communities on digital platforms and how to govern them, or how they govern themselves. Little Life and Tomorrow both dealt with male protagonists, whose early trauma shapes their identities and drives. (SPOILER) Both Sam and Jude experience leg amputations, which is noteable as an uncommon occurence, generally. Both struggle with their bodies and their identities and relationships in connection to their bodies. Both books follow these characters through long, broad stretches of their lives, tracing relationships that rise and fall away throughout the book in vignettes, episodes, and explanatory flashbacks. These were excellent reads for a young man thinking about creativity, friends, and career choices. Now reading Kairos, which is much less directly relevant but exquisitely written and touches on my interest in German culture and thought, and the working through of the past, memory, politics, and art in Europe and their intersections and influences.

And that's all he wrote.